# Delusional Developers
One of the hardest things to accept for me as a senior developer are the [delusions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delusion) less confident developers build to make sense of the world around them.  This behavior is more widespread than a person may initially consider and to some extent biases everybody one way or another.  To be a stronger developer you must continually seek to identify delusional behaviors within yourself and deliberately work to push them out of your mind.

## Common Developer Delusions
As a JavaScript developer there are two delusions I encounter very frequently.  I will explain these two in further detail below, but first I must explain what delusions are.

1. From JavaScript developers:  The DOM is extremely challenging and working to the DOM destroys architecture.
1. From Non-JavaScript developers:  The DOM is great and Web Assembly will replace JavaScript once it has the DOM.

## Belief Systems
Not everybody is religious, but everybody practices belief systems whether or not that practice is deliberate.  It is an essential part of the human experience to use the things we know to explain the things we don't know or the things that might not be immediately factual.  The result of such formulation is called an *opinion*.  In this sense logic is a primitive practice of a belief system to form a conclusion from a simple thought.  If that thought experiment produces a logical result or a fallacy of logic a belief system is exercised all the same.

Logic is desirable but not easily determined for all people.  A safer target of success is qualification.  When an opinion is formulated from knowledge that opinion is considered qualified when it is supported with evidence.  High quality qualifications are better than many weak qualifications.  A well qualified opinion is considered believable.  Believability may also be achieved when the opinion is expressed or supported by a person with high believability.

### Truth Seeking
In order to attain believability many people exercise a personal thought quest called *truth seeking*.  This is an attempt to determine how true an idea is and the more truthful the opinion becomes the more believable it becomes.  This is a bad dubious practice.  The term *truth* is often false construed with *fact* when actually it is more closely associated with the term *agreement*.  Truth seeking is a dangerous way for a person to convince themselves of agreement or disagreement of a given opinion without regard for the objectivity of the truth seeking process or the various factors that influence that process.

### Experimentation
A much stronger path to believability is experimentation.  Test the opinion in question and determine its believability.  Sometimes an opinion may need to be tested in various different ways.  John Stuart Mill once claimed truth is the winning conclusion from the collision of competing opinions.  In much the same way strong believability is achievable from the collisions of various competing experiments.

The strongest quality of experimentation is that it not only enhances the believability of an opinion to yourself, but it also produces evidence to increase the believability for other people.  Provided proper documentation the experiments can be reproduced to independently qualify outcomes and form new knowledge.

## Opinion Challenges
It is challenging to form qualified believable opinions.  Sometimes supporting evidence is misinterpreted resulting in a poorly formed opinion.  Sometimes as are poorly advised from persons we believe to be experts.  Sometimes weak opinions demonstrate enhanced believability because the weak opinion is popular among a social reference group.

The only safe place with regard to strong opinions is to assert all opinions are potentially weak, even your own.  This humbling experience of continuous doubt is called *skepticism*, which is the act of continuously second guessing opinions, even deeply held core beliefs.

A person who is willing to shift their opinion in the face of new competing evidence, on the strength of that evidence, is more believable than a person who remains unshifted.  Words that describe such unwavering are *stubborn*, *denial*, *adamant*.  It should be noted that it may be wise to not shift belief of an opinion if the challenging evidence is weak.

## Delusions
Delusions are a serious of weak opinions joined together to create a false sense of the world.  One example is conspiracy theories.  Delusions require two things to manifest:

1. The supporting opinions are of greater value than the evidence on which those opinions are framed.
1. The conclusion is based upon many opinion, many more than pieces of evidence.

As an example in development a developer may form the opinion that JavaScript is a bad sloppy language.  That opinion is not enough to qualify a delusion regardless of its agreement or believability.  If that same idea is extended with other poorly qualified opinions it creeps closer to a delusion, such as: *JavaScript is destroying the world because people are dying of disease.*  In that case a simple opinion is compounded by multiple opinions.  Each supporting opinion is poorly qualified and the link binding those opinions together is exceedingly weak.

### Weak Link
The most important part of a delusion is the link that binds opinions together.  Without this larger umbrella opinion the delusion will collapse in a series of weak opinions each being less believable than the delusional whole.  Additionally, people remain more rationally skeptical when confronting many various opinions in isolation than a larger delusion.  The reasoning for that is that it easier to qualify and disqualify things in isolation, which is called **simplicity**.  Putting thing together is called **complexity** and once together it takes increased effort and skeptism to consider the parts from the whole.

### Group Hysteria
Social reference groups can magnify the believability of delusions and the costs of skepticism.  In the absense of valid evidence or believable experts people will often impose expertise, even if not earned, upon the members of their social reference group in order to affirm their belief systems.  This manner of evidence is generally considered bad logic and has the name *bandwagon fallacy*, but some people need social support more than they need agreement with the delusion and are willing associate those two qualities to attain access to the social group.

## Affirmation
There are valid rational reasons a person may cling to an irrational or delusion conclusion.

### Cognitive Conservatism
[Cognitive Conservatism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservatism_%28belief_revision%29) is the practice of shifting an opinion to reaffirm a prior held belief when presented with evidence to the contrary.  Rational people need time to skeptically consider new evidence before adjusting opinions comprising a core personal belief.  That practice becomes irrational when after the evidence is considered a person modifies their opinions to discard the evidence.  Any given evidence is either valid or invalid and applies directly to the subject or not.  Objectively speaking once the applicability of the evidence is considered it should be discarded only in the face of competing evidence that is equally applicable.

To objective observers cognitive conservatism appears irrational and lowers believability.  While the outward practice of this behavior is decidedly cognitive it is largely the result of non-cognitive considerations.  A person can raise themselves to a more rational set of decision making by slowing down, carefully employing self-reflection, and weighing the strength of presented evidence against a current position before shifting to a new position.  People who achieve excellence in their ability to modify decisions based upon new evidence tend to be highly believable among objective observers.

### Social Affirmation
One primary motivator for the [acquiescence](https://www.dictionary.com/browse/acquiescence) to a delusion that appears irrational from the outside is inclusion into a [social support group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_support).  There are known positive mental health benefits to participation in a positive support group.  By modifying a person's behaviors to rationally defy a socially supported delusion the person is effectively removing themselves from a group that provides comfort and social support.  By all rational considerations removal from a group is a costly and likely emotionally traumatic experience even when there is strong reason to do so.

One example of extreme negative social affirmation is a group of young adults who consume drugs together.  The damage inflicted by the drugs is self-evident, but their use is reenforced by the group and that usage keeps the group together.  Even when that damage is extreme, such as death from overdose, it may be hard to leave the group for multiple self-justifying reasons.

## Developer Delusions Explained
It should be noted that I have encountered both of these noted delusions frequently for years.  I have encountered the first far longer than the second, because Web Assembly is still a relatively young technology.

### DOM is Bad
First I want to say if you are already comfortable programming in JavaScript the standard DOM methods take about 2 hours to learn and an additional 2 hours of rigorous practice to attain confidence.  It is also important to understand the DOM is a core standard web technology and it is the only means of interacting from dynamic code to markup.  All other means of dynamic interaction to markup are abstractions that compile to the standard DOM methods at a large performance cost.  According to reproducible experiments accessing the markup with the standard DOM methods is always incredibly faster than other means, except for when accessing attributes and certain forms of DOM traversal.  Finally, the most common alternative for accessing markup are query selectors which allow reading from the DOM but not manipulation thereof.  Query selectors compile down to the standard DOM methods and they can only read from the DOM, which means you still need knowledge of the standard methods or a different abstraction.

This is widely misunderstood by developers who are hesitant to approach the subject and instead that hesitance feeds their opinion on the subject that created the original hesitation in a cyclical fashion.  As with any delusion the opinion is more important the supporting evidence, which will result in all manners of excuses and strange behaviors.  The strangeness of the behaviors is largely lost in online conversation without some additional prodding.  In person the irrationality is immediately evident when you have the nonverbal communication to gauge the speakers decision making against their answers.

The most important result of this delusion is the shift a person is willing to make in their career to maintain the delusion.  I have observed developers refusing to accept jobs when the subject of the DOM is raised in interviews.  I have seen developers willing to work 100x harder on a project (literally, by hours of effort) to ensure their logic is expressed in a particular context they find more comforting against a certain abstraction.  In various conversations on the subject I have observed developers tie themselves into knots to rationalize their opinions on the subject.  These are smart rational people making highly irrational decisions about their work, potential income, and how they spend their time in order to avoid skeptical examination of their delusion.

### Web Assembly Will Replace JavaScript
This is immediately irrational, because the Web Assembly (WASM) project [claims the exact opposite](https://webassembly.org/docs/faq/#is-webassembly-trying-to-replace-javascript) very clearly and deliberately.  Again, the opinion is more important than the evidence.  The nature of this delusion is that if WASM had access to modify web pages there would be no need for JavaScript and thus JavaScript will simply disappear.  While this position lacks any evidence it is formed from a collection of opinions that defy evidence.  It should be noted that at the time of this writing JavaScript is the most popular programming language in the world by Github project count and StackOverflow question count.

I suspect the nature of this delusion is because a subset of believers feel fear, shame, or insecurity when confronted with JavaScript but is tasked to write code requiring knowledge of JavaScript or other web technologies.  If the suspicion is confirmed replacing JavaScript would not solve the intended problem because the remaining web technologies and their intrinsic relationships, particularly the DOM, would remain unchanged.  This assumption is largely based upon the observed behaviors in the prior discussed delusion framed against the evidence defying positions comprising this delusion.

One of the common supporting opinions is that JavaScript is only popular because it executes on webpages.  I have been writing JavaScript long enough to know this doesn't make any sense.  JavaScript has been the language of the browsers in a standard way since the DOM was codified into a formal W3C standard in 1998.  Since that time JavaScript has been widely available everywhere due to the success of the web, but the languages was extremely unpopular.  The language did not become popular until around 2008 after years of evangelism and the release of Google Chrome web browser.  In was in 2010 when that popularity began to explode with the release of more modern browsers and the Node.js project allowing execution of JavaScript outside the browser.

You also have to understand what WASM is to see how this delusion is a bit strange.  WASM is a sand-boxed environment intended to execute programs written from any language as an island within a webpage.  In that context WASM can be thought of as something like 90s era Java applets or Adobe Flash.  WASM comes with a security guarantee that its containing page will be protected from the WASM application instance because WASM is a private sandbox.  That means you can run a WASM application from anywhere and it will not modify the surrounding page or anything outside the page, such as the browser chrome or the OS desktop.  In order for WASM to replace JavaScript the WASM application instance would have to be granted access to the DOM of the containing page, which is the centerpiece of the delusion, but that cannot happen and simultaneously achieve the project's security promise.

To be fair though the people advocating for this delusion are doing so because they are irrationally apprehensive of JavaScript and web technologies in general.  That said they most likely lack the experience necessary of writing to the DOM and manipulating pages via the DOM.  Without such experiences your perspective of what these technologies are is radically different and in that vacuum of knowledge and experience it is easier to frame these technologies into something that makes sense to the developer, such as warp them to what the developer wishes they were.

To compound the situation further there is work being done on a *host bindings* extension to WASM.  The goal of the host bindings initiative is such that a WASM application can execute [Web APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API).  That work will extend a WASM container to allow access to instructions already available in the browser.  In this initiative WASM will also get a DOM mechanism, which is necessary for execution of something like a [DOMParser utility](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DOMParser).  That DOM mechanism will allow a WASM application to execute DOM methods without having to provide its own DOM application, but it will be limited to markup within the WASM application.  The idea is to provide WASM the means to execute DOM instructions using a DOM engine like the browser already has, but not against the containing page's *document* object.  Therefore access to DOM instructions is available to WASM without violation of the WASM security promise, which is completely outside the scope of the delusion.

If you have no understanding of how these technologies work or their delivery it is easy to be confused (hopeful) on this matter.  The irrationally of that confusion is evident when it becomes [wishful thinking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wishful_thinking), or assurances of a guaranteed future state that isn't under construction.  My personal opinion is that the DOM binding specification is deliberately vague on the subject of DOM externalism to avoid people attempting to derail the nature of the work on the specification considering how passionate some people are about this delusion.  This mass hysteria was evidenced in the formation of the ECMAScript 2015 specification due to incredibly strong demand for classes in JavaScript by person's with little or no investment in the language.

The biggest problem with this delusion is that it allows developers to advocate for really bad decisions at present for future hope that will likely never come to pass.

## Conclusion
In the case of most delusions people make a strong attempt to advocate for their position.  Actually, they attempt to impose their opinions with force as necessary to prevent access to any skepticism.  In most cases I don't care.  I simply ignore the silly people and let them believe whatever silly things they want.  The two listed developer delusions, particularly the first one, are exceedingly frustrating because they impact and limit my performance as a senior software engineer.  They also mean I must shift my attention from solving challenging software problems to delicately addressing sensitive interpersonal decisions often contrary to product quality.

Its hard to have rational conversations on this matter because delusional people more invested in their opinions than they are in the work they perform.  That automatically means they are more invested in their opinions than I am in mine and typically won't access counter arguments even when presented with evidence.  Not only can such a challenge turn a person hostile and you their enemy but it can also result in retaliation.

One objective way to demonstrate the foolishness is to remove all code standards from an organization and replace them with business standards on the limits of code acceptance.  An example of business standard would be something like limits on execution speed, limits on code size, limits on quantities of dependencies, or limits on service calls.  Watch and listen to the extremeness or desperation of the counter arguments.  If the actual goal were product quality that change in standards and requirements would have little to no impact on the work at hand.
