# A Faulty Premise
In logic an opinion, argument, or assertion requires two things: a function of consistent form and the foundation on which that function is formed.  An argument is valid so long as its foundation, or premise, is true and the output is never false. A false premise may not necessarily result in an argument with a false result, though it often does.  In order to ensure correctness it is necessary to form arguments that are not faulty, which means avoiding false premises since although they may not always be false are always capable of falsity.

## Examples of common false premise
This short paper is an attempt to identify some commonly occurring false premises in modern English language.

### That can't be right
Any argument formed from a thought of *that cannot be right* is a faulty premise.  A conclusion is correct or it isn't.  Logic is valid or it isn't.  To say that something *cannot be right* suggests one of two things:

1. A conclusion is presumed to be incorrect without any attempt to qualify such an assertion.  In science any theory is valid so long as it isn't proven false.
2. A person is decidedly imposing a conclusion in a deliberate effort to avoid testing.

This is a form of qualified ignorance often imparted from an improper mixture of experience and bias.  Whether the motivation is passively or actively applied it results a potential state of error whereby a difference of opinion is prematurely dismissed.  The harm from this is a lost opportunity or a hastily abandoned discovery that is thus available to and better prepared for a competing agent.

A common example is an outright dismissal of an original solution to a technical problem.  If a given solution is novel then it has never existed before and those is not yet correct or in error.  The idea would have be tested at least once to form any conclusion upon it or tested several times to form a more valid conclusion.  There is a common fear of originality in human behavior and produces a natural response for dismissing the new approach prematurely.

### But it's never happened before
A common failure is to suggest that since something has never happened before it will never happen moving forward.  This argument was the primary faulty premise of the 2008 housing market crash.  The idea is that since the housing market had never failed in the past it would never fail in the near future despite substantial evidence to the contrary.  The result is that people who were sufficiently informed and prepared for the coming market failure refused to take appropriate action and thus lost incredibly large sums of money regardless.

### That's not how it used to be
The inability to accept that not only do changes occur, but have occurred sufficiently to warrant a change of effort are often ignored.  This is a failure of reasoning stemming from two cognitive failures:

1. A failure to plan.
2. An inability to accept change.

Many people cannot differentiate planning from instruction.  Instructions provide guidance upon how to execute a task while planning provides guidance on what tasks to execute.  In logic instructions are algebra while planning is calculus.  Counter-intuitively the ability to distinguish instruction from planning does not appear to have any association with intelligence and may be associated directly to neurologic development in the brain. Even without any formal scholarly training or education a person with a proper vision can differentiate these capabilities and respond with appropriate guidance, but education and proper training are often necessary to properly develop this skill.

The inability to accept change is a cognitive failure resulting from the inability to shift opinions in the face of new evidence.  This could be due to an inability to appreciate new research or qualify emerging data, but is most typically due to behavior and poor logic.  There are two primary behaviors that account for irrationally resisting change.  The passive behavior is called [cognitive conservatism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservatism_(belief_revision)) and is frequently qualified by [fault logic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_fallacies).  The active behavior is [defensiveness](https://www.betterhelp.com/advice/behavior/what-is-defensive-behavior-and-what-does-it-look-like/) which results in a series of deliberate decisions that individually may be logical and valid but in collection are faulty and disastrous, particularly with regard to communication and relationships.

### One day it will be better
Wishful thinking is the idea what problems will achieve solution over time due to natural mitigation.  This is problematic because there is no guarantee a problem with either improve or achieve resolution and thus sets unrealistic expectations.  A catastrophic result emerges when the unrealistic expectation met by wishful thinking meets a critical impasse.  A critical impasse could be a situation, event, or even some arbitrary date.  The result is catastrophic because not only is the original problem still present, but now it becomes clear that the problem is potentially more severe than previously estimated and possibly continuously growing worse.  It becomes evident that time and resources which could have been spent fixing the problem before the critical impasse were wasted and now insufficient capabilities exist to solve the problem without incurring increased expenses.

One example comes from the [Stockdale Paradox](https://innovationandcreativityinstitute.com/stockdale-paradox/) of the book [Good to Great](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Good_to_Great) in which [Admiral James Stockdale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Stockdale) learned to differentiate the survivors from the non-survivors the moment they arrived at the [Hỏa Lò Prison](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H%E1%BB%8Fa_L%C3%B2_Prison) with a high degree of precision.  The people more likely to die where described as *optimists* believing resolution was just around the corner in the near future.  When that near arbitrary future arrived and they still remained confined in prison their hope was diminished and eventually the hopeful people gave up emotionally and died due to malnutrition and illness.  Conversely, those that accepted the reality of their current fate without sacrificing faith of success for hope were better able to adapt to the stresses of the environment and were more likely to survive.

### Our way is the best way
[Ethnocentricity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethnocentrism) is the behavior and thinking that your way of doing things is best and thus you are the model by which others should follow.  This form of qualification serves to create like-minded social groups that are highly exclusive and prejudicial.  The harm from this behavior is a hasty disregard of all things not rapidly supported by the social reference group regardless of any evidence or self-evaluation.  This weakens the group by ignoring opportunities for competitiveness and weakens the group members through a dedicated alignment to faulty arguments and their erroneous conclusions.

Ethnocentricity is an equivocation failure resulting from the local popularity of a thing as a measure of argumentative validity.  Logic is validated only according to the truthiness of its premise and output.  Popularity is irrelevant to that test.

Ethnocentricity forms primarily from defensive social behaviors.  People naturally congregate into groups for security reasons because a large group is generally viewed as stronger and more defensible than a either a small group or an individual.  When security is the primary motivator for group cohesion people may be willing to trade their individual identity for group association which often implies conformance to group ideals, values, and communication.

John Stuart Mill in his essay [On Liberty](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/On_Liberty) directly mentioned the greatest threat to liberty is a hostile majority.  That essay is widely regarded as the definitive guide to the concept and philosophy of liberty.

### Embarrassment is the worth case scenario
[Embarrassment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embarrassment) is the perceived loss of social stature whether as honor, dignity, or hierarchy in a defined social structure.  Embarrassment can apply to individuals or groups and is often received as a mortal weakness.  In prior points of history at the transition of tribalism to nationalism the mere perception of social weakness was enough to designate groups for elimination by the various competing factions in the local region.  Such scenarios are still present with regard to locally competing criminal factions when a change in social dynamic forces an increase of competition.

When embarrassment avoidance becomes a (the) primary concern other regulated behaviors are often casually discarded.  For example embarrassment avoidance is a common motive of criminal behavior and excessive social sanctions.  For individuals embarrassment can result in [avoidance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avoidance_coping) associated behaviors that impair an individual's perception of problems and necessary mitigation controls.

Embarrassment and the negative qualities associated with embarrassment avoidance can be solved by shifting focus away from embarrassment through redefining the terms of embarrassment.  For example if embarrassment is typically defined as a loss of social prestige from a marketplace ranking instead redefine embarrassment as a violation of consumer protection.  In this case one arbitrary metric is exchanged for another as a competitive selling point for increased consumer trust and lower regulatory exposure.

The best way to ensure embarrassment is solved proactively is to define goals and values.  Enforcement of goals and values internalizes the metrics of success away from external factors the person or organization does not control.  The benefit of internalized controls is that person or group determines the factors that define embarrassment with controls sufficient that embarrassment avoidance is either not necessary or implicitly addressed as part of a more immediately important concern.  In this spirit embarrassment is traded for [integrity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrity).

## A Truthy Premise
The best way to avoid the prior described thought traps is through rigorous self-training and self-awareness.  Accept that a new idea can also be right and superior even when challenging you or your position.  Accept that a evidence of a problem is worth consideration even though the described problem has not yet occurred and may not ever occur.  Accept that things change and as they change prior formed decisions become invalid and must be reconsidered.  Accept evidence and problems as they are not as you want them to be.  Accept the reality of a negative circumstance and deal with it.  Accept that you are probably wrong and opposing ideas are worth testing, more especially when not popular.  Accept that embarrassment can be traded for integrity.

Perhaps the best position for a valid argument or strong decision is summed into a single word: [humility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humility).  When encountering a problem be very clear about your proximity to the problem and either solve it directly or transfer it to somebody better equipped.  [Know thyself](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Know_thyself), be critical, and make an original decision.